**Released 1st August 2024**

**For PocketMine-MP 5.17**

**EasyLibrary v1.2.0** is a major feature update to EasyLibrary, including support for PocketMine-MP 5.17 plugins, bringing a large list of features and improvements over the previous version.

It is not compatible with plugins written for version 1.1.5 or lower, and plugins may require code changes to work with it.

As this changelog is quite large, its accuracy and completeness cannot be guaranteed. Make sure you're looking at the [latest revision](https://github.com/ImperaZim/EasyLibrary/blob/development/changelogs/1.2.md), as it may be amended after release.

---

# `imperazim\components\config`

**New Feature: config extended**

To use Config in Movie you must use the Config class from the library to convert and use the new methods added in the Config class.

---

# `imperazim\components\database`

**New Feature: database component**

A way to automatically register a database in your plugin has been added. To register, you must create a property called `$database` in your main, in the format:

```php
public array $database = [
  'type' => 'mysqli | sqlite',
  'host' => 'your.address.host',
  'username' => 'yourUsername',
  'password' => 'yourPassword',
  'database' => 'yourDatabase'
];
```

---

# `imperazim\components\filesystem`

`library\filesystem` moved to `imperazim\components\filesystem`

**Update: File updated**

Now File accepts .ini files and there is no longer a need to use PocketMine-MP Config as a parameter, if you want to use a PocketMine-MP config, convert it with `imperazim\components\config\Config`.

---

# `imperazim\components\hud`

`library\visuals` moved to `imperazim\components\hud`

---

# `imperazim\components\item`

`library\item` moved to `imperazim\components\item`
`library\item\ItemFactory` moved to `imperazim\components\serialization\ItemSerializable`
`library\item\utils\ItemRegistry` moved to `imperazim\components\serialization\ItemFactory`

**New Feature: ItemFactory Class**

The `ItemFactory` trait is designed to handle the registration and management of items in a Minecraft plugin. Here’s a breakdown of its functionality:

- **`registerItem`**: Registers a new item with the system. Validates and registers callbacks for serialization and deserialization. Updates the item type dictionary with the new item. Throws an exception if the item is already registered and `force` is not set to true.
- **`validateCallbacks`**: Ensures the provided serialization and deserialization callbacks match the expected signatures.
- **`isItemRegistered`**: Checks if an item is already registered based on its type ID.
- **`overrideStringToItemParser`**: Overrides the default parser for converting item names to item instances.
- **`registerSerializer`**: Registers a serializer callback for an item. Uses the namespace to ensure the serializer is correctly mapped.
- **`registerDeserializer`**: Registers a deserializer callback for an item. Maps the deserializer to the item using the namespace.
- **`updateTypeDictionary`**: Updates the item type dictionary with the new item’s runtime ID and namespace.
- **`generateNamespace`**: Generates a namespace for the item if not explicitly provided.
- **`getRuntimeIdByName`**: Retrieves the runtime ID for a given item name, primarily for vanilla items. Uses a JSON file to map item names to their runtime IDs.
- **`getRegisteredItems`**: Returns an array of all registered items.

**New Traits in `imperazim\components\item\traits`**

- **`EvolutionaryItemTrait`**: Provides functionality for managing item levels, which can be useful for items that evolve or change state based on their level. Here’s a detailed breakdown of its features:

  - **`getLevel`**: Returns the current level of the item. Returns `null` if the level is not set.
  - **`setLevel`**: Sets the current level of the item. Accepts `null` to unset the level.
  - **`getMinLevel`**: Returns the minimum level of the item. Returns `null` if there is no minimum level restriction.
  - **`setMinLevel`**: Sets the minimum level of the item. Accepts `null` to remove the minimum level restriction.
  - **`getMaxLevel`**: Returns the maximum level of the item. Returns `null` if there is no maximum level restriction.
  - **`setMaxLevel`**: Sets the maximum level of the item. Accepts `null` to remove the maximum level restriction.
  - **`isLevelWithinBounds`**: Checks if the current level is within the defined minimum and maximum levels. Returns `true` if the level is within bounds, otherwise `false`. Returns `false` if the current level is `null`.
  - **`incrementLevel`**: Increments the current level by a specified amount. If the level exceeds the maximum level, it is set to the maximum level. Initializes the level to `0` if it is `null` before incrementing.
  - **`decrementLevel`**: Decrements the current level by a specified amount. If the level drops below the minimum level, it is set to the minimum level. Initializes the level to `0` if it is `null` before decrementing.

- **`ItemRarityTrait`**: Provides functionality for managing the rarity of items. This is useful for categorizing items based on their rarity, which can influence their value or effects in a game. Here’s a detailed breakdown of its features:

  - **Constants**:

    - **`COMMON`**: Represents a common rarity level.
    - **`UNCOMMON`**: Represents an uncommon rarity level.
    - **`RARE`**: Represents a rare rarity level.
    - **`EPIC`**: Represents an epic rarity level.
    - **`LEGENDARY`**: Represents a legendary rarity level.

  - **Methods**:
    - **`getRarity`**: Returns the current rarity of the item. Returns `null` if the rarity is not set.
    - **`setRarity`**: Sets the rarity of the item. Accepts one of the defined rarity constants or `null` to unset the rarity.

- **`UsableItemTrait`**: Provides functionality for managing the usage and cooldown of items. It is designed to handle situations where items have a cooldown period before they can be used again. Here’s a detailed breakdown of its features:

  - **Methods**:
    - **`setLastUsedTime`**: Sets the `lastUsedTime` to the current microtime, marking the item as used.
    - **`getLastUsedTime`**: Returns the timestamp of the last time the item was used. Returns `null` if the item has not been used.
    - **`setCooldownPeriod`**: Sets the cooldown period in seconds. Accepts an integer representing the cooldown duration.
    - **`getCooldownPeriod`**: Returns the current cooldown period in seconds.
    - **`isCooldownComplete`**: Checks if the cooldown period has passed since the item was last used. Returns `true` if the cooldown is complete, otherwise `false`.
    - **`getRemainingCooldownTime`**: Calculates and returns the remaining cooldown time in seconds. Returns `0.0` if the cooldown period has expired or if the item has not been used.
    - **`renderProgressBar`**: Renders a textual progress bar representing the cooldown status. Uses optional parameters for visual representation:
      - **`$zero`**: The character used to represent incomplete sections of the bar (default is `'§7|'`).
      - **`$one`**: The character used to represent completed sections of the bar (default is `'§e|'`).
      - **`$length`**: The total length of the progress bar (default is `20`). Returns a string that visually represents the progress of the cooldown as a bar.

---

# `imperazim\components\plugin`

`library\plugin` moved to `imperazim\components\plugin`

**Update: PluginToolkit updated**

The `PluginToolkit` class extends `PluginBase` and provides a comprehensive toolkit for managing plugin functionality within the server environment. It includes methods for handling commands, listeners, and resources, as well as managing server paths and database configurations.

- **Constructor**: Initializes the `PluginToolkit` with essential server and plugin information, including the plugin loader, server instance, plugin description, data folder path, file path, and resource provider.
- **`setMotd(string $motd): self`**: Sets the server's Message of the Day (MOTD). Supports language-based MOTD setting if applicable.
- **`getDatabase(): mixed`**: Retrieves the database configuration and connects to the database using `DatabaseManager`. Throws `PluginException` if the configuration is invalid.
- **`validateDatabaseConfig(?array $database): bool`**: Validates the database configuration array, ensuring it contains all required keys.
- **`initComponents(string $type, mixed $components): void`**: Initializes and registers components based on their type ('listener' or 'command'). Handles arrays of components and validates each component instance.
- **`overwriteCommands(?array $commands = null): void`**: Unregisters existing

commands and registers new ones based on the provided array or default plugin commands.

- **`unregisterCommands(): void`**: Unregisters all existing commands managed by the plugin.
- **`registerCommand(Command|string $command): void`**: Registers a single command with the server. Accepts command instances or class names.
- **`registerCommands(array $commands): void`**: Registers multiple commands with the server.
- **`registerListener(Listener|string $listener): void`**: Registers a single listener with the server. Accepts listener instances or class names.
- **`registerListeners(array $listeners): void`**: Registers multiple listeners with the server.
- **`getServerPath(string $path): string`**: Constructs and returns a full server path based on the provided relative path.
- **`getResourceAsStream(string $resource): string`**: Retrieves the content of a resource file as a string.
- **`getResourceAsRawStream(string $resource): ?string`**: Retrieves the raw content of a resource file. Returns null if the resource does not exist.
- **`getPluginInfo(): PluginInfo`**: Retrieves and parses the plugin's `plugin.yml` file to return detailed plugin information.

---

# `imperazim\components\serialization`

**New namespace: namespace changed**

- `library\utils\JsonSerializable` moved to `imperazim\components\serialization\JsonSerializable`
- `library\utils\Vector3Serializable` moved to `imperazim\components\serialization\Vector3Serializable`
- `library\utils\LocationSerializable` moved to `imperazim\components\serialization\LocationSerializable`
- `library\utils\PositionSerializable` moved to `imperazim\components\serialization\PositionSerializable`

**New Feature: ItemSerializable**

> The `ItemSerializable` class in the `imperazim\components\serialization` namespace provides methods for serializing and deserializing `Item` objects to and from JSON. It handles the conversion of item data, including NBT tags, between JSON format and `Item` objects in PocketMine-MP.

### Methods

#### jsonDeserialize

**Signature:** `public static function jsonDeserialize(string $data): ?Item`

- **Description:** This method takes a JSON string as input, decodes it, and constructs an `Item` object from the decoded data.
- **Parameters:**
  - `string $data`: JSON string representing the item data.
- **Returns:** An `Item` object if successful, or `null` if deserialization fails.
- **Exceptions:**
  - Throws an `Exception` if there is an error in JSON decoding, if the `vanillaName` is missing, or if there is an issue with the NBT data.
  - Catches exceptions and logs them using `\crashdump`.

**Key Steps:**

1. Decodes the JSON string.
2. Checks for errors in JSON decoding.
3. Extracts the `vanillaName` and creates an `Item` object using `StringToItemParser`.
4. Sets the item count if specified.
5. Decodes and applies NBT data if present.
6. Returns the constructed `Item` object or `null` if an error occurs.

#### jsonSerialize

**Signature:** `public static function jsonSerialize(Item $item): ?string`

- **Description:** This method takes an `Item` object, converts its data into a JSON string.
- **Parameters:**
  - `Item $item`: The item to be serialized.
- **Returns:** A JSON string representing the item data, or `null` if serialization fails.
- **Exceptions:**
  - Throws an `Exception` if there is an issue during serialization.
  - Catches exceptions and logs them using `\crashdump`.

**Key Steps:**

1. Creates an associative array with the item's `vanillaName`.
2. Adds the item count to the array if it is not 1.
3. Encodes NBT data to base64 if the item has named tags.
4. Encodes the array to a JSON string.
5. Returns the JSON string or `null` if an error occurs.

### Usage

> The `ItemSerializable` class is useful for converting item data to and from JSON, making it easier to store and retrieve item information in a serialized format. This can be particularly beneficial for saving item data to files or databases, or for transmitting item data over a network.

**New Feature: SkinSerializable**

> The `SkinSerializable` class in the `imperazim\components\serialization` namespace provides methods for serializing and deserializing `Skin` objects to and from associative arrays. This allows for easy conversion between `Skin` objects and formats suitable for storage or transmission.

### Methods

#### jsonSerialize

**Signature:** `public static function jsonSerialize(Skin $skin): array`

- **Description:** Serializes a `Skin` object into an associative array.
- **Parameters:**
  - `Skin $skin`: The `Skin` object containing the data to serialize.
- **Returns:** An associative array containing the serialized data of the `Skin` object.

**Key Steps:**

1. Retrieves the `skinId` from the `Skin` object.
2. Encodes the `skinData` in base64 format.
3. Retrieves the `capeData` from the `Skin` object.
4. Retrieves the `geometryName` from the `Skin` object.
5. Retrieves the `geometryData` from the `Skin` object.
6. Returns an associative array containing all these elements.

Example output:

```php
[
  'skinId' => 'exampleSkinId',
  'skinData' => 'base64EncodedSkinData',
  'capeData' => 'exampleCapeData',
  'geometryName' => 'exampleGeometryName',
  'geometryData' => 'exampleGeometryData',
]
```

#### jsonDeserialize

**Signature:** `public static function jsonDeserialize(array $data): Skin`

- **Description:** Deserializes data from an associative array to create a new instance of `Skin`.
- **Parameters:**
  - `array $data`: The array containing the data to deserialize.
- **Returns:** A new instance of `Skin` created based on the provided data.

**Key Steps:**

1. Decodes the `skinData` from base64 format.
2. Extracts other elements (`skinId`, `capeData`, `geometryName`, `geometryData`) from the array.
3. Creates and returns a new `Skin` object using the extracted data.

Example input:

```php
[
  'skinId' => 'exampleSkinId',
  'skinData' => 'base64EncodedSkinData',
  'capeData' => 'exampleCapeData',
  'geometryName' => 'exampleGeometryName',
  'geometryData' => 'exampleGeometryData',
]
```

### Usage

> The `SkinSerializable` class is useful for converting `Skin` objects to and from associative arrays, making it easier to store and retrieve skin data in a serialized format. This is particularly beneficial for saving skin data to files or databases, or for transmitting skin data over a network.

### Example

**Serialization:**

```php
$skin = new Skin('exampleSkinId', $rawSkinData, $capeData, $geometryName, $geometryData);
$serializedSkin = SkinSerializable::jsonSerialize($skin);
// $serializedSkin now contains an associative array with the skin data.
```

**Deserialization:**

```php
$data = [
  'skinId' => 'exampleSkinId',
  'skinData' => base64EncodedSkinData,
  'capeData' => 'exampleCapeData',
  'geometryName' => 'exampleGeometryName',
  'geometryData' => 'exampleGeometryData',
];
$skin = SkinSerializable::jsonDeserialize($data);
// $skin now contains a new Skin object with the provided data.
```

---

# `imperazim\components\ui`

**New namespace: namespace changed**

- `library\interface` moved to `imperazim\components\ui`

**New Feature: UI classes (Form, Menu, Dialogue)**

### Changelog

> This guide provides instructions on using the `Form`, `Menu`, and `Dialogue` classes from the `imperazim\components\ui` namespace. All three classes function similarly and require creating a subclass to implement their specific structure and validation logic.

### General Usage

To use any of these UI classes (`Form`, `Menu`, `Dialogue`), follow these steps:

1. **Create a Subclass**: Define a new class that extends one of the base UI classes (`Form`, `Menu`, `Dialogue`).
2. **Implement Structure Method**: Implement the `structure` method to define the UI's layout and functionality.
3. **Create an Instance**: Instantiate your subclass with a `Player` object and optional data.

### Steps to Implement

1. **Create a Subclass**

   - Define a new class that extends one of the base UI classes. This class will implement the specific structure for the UI.

2. **Implement the Structure Method**

   - The `structure` method is where you define the layout and functionality of the UI. This method must return an instance of the respective UI type (`IForm`, `IMenu`, `IDialogue`).

3. **Create an Instance and Use It**
   - Instantiate your subclass with a `Player` object and any optional data you need to pass. The UI will be automatically sent to the player upon instantiation.

### Summary

- **Create a Subclass**: Extend one of the UI base classes (`Form`, `Menu`, `Dialogue`).
- **Implement the Structure Method**: Define the UI's layout and functionality.
- **Instantiate and Use**: Create an instance of your subclass with a `Player` object and optional data.

By following these steps, you can easily create and manage custom UI elements in your PocketMine-MP plugins.

---

# `imperazim\components\utils`

**New namespace: namespace changed**  
`library\utils` moved to `imperazim\components\utils`

## New Feature: Text Class

> Introducing the `Text` class, a comprehensive utility for various text manipulation operations. Below is a summary of the new functionalities:

### Features

- **`insertLineBreaks(string $text, int $maxLength = 36): string`**

  - Inserts new lines every specified number of characters without splitting words.
  - Example: `insertLineBreaks('This is a long piece of text that needs line breaks.', 10)`.

- **`stripHtmlTags(string $text): string`**

  - Removes all HTML tags from the input text.
  - Example: `stripHtmlTags('<p>This is a paragraph.</p>')` returns `This is a paragraph.`.

- **`removeExtraSpaces(string $text): string`**

  - Removes extra spaces and trims the text.
  - Example: `removeExtraSpaces('  This  is   spaced text.  ')` returns `This is spaced text.`.

- **`toUpperCase(string $text): string`**

  - Converts the input text to uppercase.
  - Example: `toUpperCase('This is a test.')` returns `THIS IS A TEST.`.

- **`toLowerCase(string $text): string`**

  - Converts the input text to lowercase.
  - Example: `toLowerCase('THIS IS A TEST.')` returns `this is a test.`.

- **`truncate(string $text, int $maxLength = 100): string`**

  - Truncates the text to a specified length, adding ellipsis if needed.
  - Example: `truncate('This is a long text that needs to be truncated.', 20)` returns `This is a long te...`.

- **`removeSpecialChars(string $text): string`**
  - Removes special characters from the text.
  - Example: `removeSpecialChars('Hello, World!')` returns `Hello World`.

### Usage Examples

- **Line Break Insertion**
  `Text::insertLineBreaks('This is a long piece of text that needs line breaks.', 10)` might return:

  ```
  This is a
  long piece
  of text
  that needs
  line
  breaks.
  ```

- **HTML Tag Stripping**
  `Text::stripHtmlTags('<div><p>Text with HTML</p></div>')` returns `Text with HTML`.

- **Extra Space Removal**
  `Text::removeExtraSpaces('  Text   with  extra   spaces. ')` returns `Text with extra spaces.`.

- **Uppercase Conversion**
  `Text::toUpperCase('uppercase text')` returns `UPPERCASE TEXT`.

- **Lowercase Conversion**
  `Text::toLowerCase('LOWERCASE TEXT')` returns `lowercase text`.

- **Text Truncation**
  `Text::truncate('This text is too long and needs to be cut short.', 25)` returns `This text is too long...`.

- **Special Character Removal**
  `Text::removeSpecialChars('Special $chars@!#')` returns `Special chars`.

## New Feature: Number Class

> Introducing the `Number` class, a versatile utility for various numerical operations. Below is a summary of the new functionalities:

### Features

- **`formatAsCurrency($number, int $decimals = 0, string $decimalSeparator = ',', string $thousandSeparator = '.'): string`**

  - Converts a number to a formatted currency string.
  - Example: `formatAsCurrency(10000)` returns `10.000`.

- **`formatAsStatistic($number): string`**

  - Converts a number to a statistical shorthand string.
  - Example: `formatAsStatistic(10000)` returns `10K`.

- **`format(int $length, string|int $number): string`**

  - Formats a given ID as a string with leading zeros if the input is numeric.
  - Example: `format(5, 123)` returns `00123`.

- **`formatAsPercentage(float $number, int $decimals = 2): string`**

  - Converts a number to a formatted percentage string.
  - Example: `formatAsPercentage(0.85)` returns `85%`.

- **`roundToDecimals(float $number, int $decimals = 2): float`**

  - Rounds a number to a specified number of decimal places.
  - Example: `roundToDecimals(2.3456, 2)` returns `2.35`.

- **`max(array $numbers)`**

  - Gets the maximum number from an array of numbers.
  - Returns `null` if the array is empty.

- **`min(array $numbers)`**

  - Gets the minimum number from an array of numbers.
  - Returns `null` if the array is empty.

- **`random(int $min = 0, int $max = PHP_INT_MAX): int`**
  - Generates a random number within a specified range.
  - Example: `random(1, 10)` might return any integer between 1 and 10.

### Usage Examples

- **Currency Formatting**
  `Number::formatAsCurrency(1234567.89, 2, '.', ',')` returns `1,234,567.89`.

- **Statistical Formatting**
  `Number::formatAsStatistic(1234567)` returns `1.2M`.

- **ID Formatting**
  `Number::format(6, 123)` returns `000123`.

- **Percentage Formatting**
  `Number::formatAsPercentage(0.857)` returns `85.70%`.

- **Rounding**
  `Number::roundToDecimals(3.14159, 3)` returns `3.142`.

- **Maximum and Minimum**
  `Number::max([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])` returns `5`.
  `Number::min([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])` returns `1`.

- **Random Number Generation**
  `Number::random(1, 100)` might return any integer between 1 and 100.

---

# `imperazim\components\world`

**New namespace: namespace changed**  
`library\world` moved to `imperazim\components\world`

## New Feature: Area Class

> Introducing a new utility class, `Area`, designed to facilitate the manipulation of blocks within specific areas in the world. Below is a summary of the new functionalities:

### Features

- **`getAreaBlocks(Position $pos1, Position $pos2): array`**

  - Retrieves all blocks within the area defined by two positions.
  - Validates that both positions are in the same world and that the world is assigned.

- **`setAreaBlocks(Position $pos1, Position $pos2, $blocks): void`**

  - Sets blocks within the area defined by two positions.
  - Supports both single block and array of blocks.
  - Validates that the blocks are valid instances of `Block`.

- **`fillAreaWithBlock(Position $pos1, Position $pos2, Block $block): void`**

  - Fills the entire area defined by two positions with a specific block.

- **`clearArea(Position $pos1, Position $pos2): void`**

  - Clears the entire area, replacing all blocks within the specified area with air blocks.

- **`replaceBlocksInArea(Position $pos1, Position $pos2, Block $targetBlock, Block $replacementBlock): void`**

  - Replaces a specific type of block with another within the defined area.

- **`countBlocksInArea(Position $pos1, Position $pos2, Block $targetBlock): int`**
  - Counts the number of specific blocks within the area defined by two positions.

### Validation

- **Position Validation**

  - Ensures that both positions are assigned a world.
  - Confirms that both positions are within the same world.

- **Block Validation**
  - Ensures that the provided blocks are valid instances of `Block`.
  - Supports validation for both single block instances and arrays of blocks.

## New Feature: WorldManager Class

> Introducing the `WorldManager` class, designed to streamline and enhance the management of worlds within the server. Below is a summary of the new functionalities:

### Features

- **`getWorldPath(string $world): string`**

  - Retrieves the path to the specified world's directory.

- **`worldExists(string $name): bool`**

  - Checks if a world with the given name exists.

- **`getWorld(string $name): ?World`**

  - Retrieves a world by its name, loading it if necessary.

- **`getWorlds(): array`**

  - Returns an array of all loaded worlds.

- **`getDefaultWorld(): ?World`**

  - Gets the default world of the server.

- **`renameWorldName(string $old, string $new): void`**

  - Renames a world from an old name to a new name, handling necessary data updates.

- **`load(string $name): bool`**

  - Loads a world by its name, if it is not already loaded.

- **`unload(string $name): bool`**

  - Unloads a world by its name.

- **`createWorld(string $world, string $generator, mixed $seed): bool`**

  - Creates a new world with the specified name, generator, and seed.

- **`duplicateWorld(string $oldName, string $newWorld): void`**
  - Duplicates an existing world

to a new world name.

- **`backupWorld(string $name): bool`**

  - Creates a backup of the specified world.

- **`restoreWorld(string $name, string $backupPath): bool`**

  - Restores a world from a specified backup path.

- **`deleteWorld(string $name): bool`**
  - Deletes a world by its name.

### Validation

- **World Existence Validation**

  - Ensures that worlds exist before performing operations such as renaming, duplicating, backing up, or deleting.

- **Error Handling**
  - Comprehensive error handling using `WorldException` to manage exceptions and ensure stability during world management operations.
